<p>No matter what you read or saw in movies about Wall Street in the '80s and '90s it was much wilder than that. Weed and cocaine were everywhere and like alcohol often part of the business day, business deals, or after work entertainment. But it was also a period of transformational innovation and market disruption. Fortunes were made, some were lost, and an entire ecosystem of products, services, and businesses fed off the financial largesse of Wall Street fueled by digital transformation of trading systems, market data, and exchanges. Exclusive and expensive clubs, bars, restaurants, and luxury real estate, jewelry, clothing, and car retailers spent all year cultivating relationships with superstar traders and senior financial industry executives.</p>

<p>Like hungry western bears eagerly awaiting the all-you-can-eat buffet of the annual salmon migration everybody on and around Wall Street counted down the days to awards of 6, 7, and 8 figure bonuses at big investment banks and funds. Financial beneficiaries extended well beyond traders and top executives to include IT and software professionals developing the advanced technology, applications, and algorithms that made everything possible. It included operations staff that kept ever larger and more complex trades flowing smoothly and maintained real-time trading positions, risk exposure, P&L summaries, and appeased the regulators.</p>

<p>There were plenty of trading and investment management profits to go around on Wall Street during these years, and the often life changing year-end bonuses were expected by professionals at all levels. For many the annual bonus was larger than their guaranteed yearly salary, the amount correlated to measurable performance excellence in someone’s given role. Artificial preferences regardless of justification were unheard of, and excuses didn’t work on Wall Street or at the vendors and big consulting firms serving the financial services industry.</p>

<p>Sometimes bonuses were expected by employees who thought they were better than they were, but they usually weren’t around very long. Wall Street ran on numbers, and tangible performance results were what mattered for compensation and promotion decisions. Performance might mean trading profits for a trader, returns for an investment manager, or trade processing speed and efficiency in the middle and back office.</p>

<p>Getting a smaller than expected bonus was disappointing, but most people accepted the need to improve performance relative to peers. If someone received no bonus in a given year it was a message to get better fast or call your favorite headhunter. It was usually a precursor to termination as part of the yearly culling of the bottom 10+% of performers.</p>

<p>Wall Street high performance culture was survival of the most deserving, and the transparent, preference-free pursuit of excellence produced superior business outcomes and happier, more productive employees. If you performed well on Wall Street your job was secure and you made a lot of money. Nobody cared about race, color, nationality, sex, gender, academic credentials, politics, or who somebody slept with. Wall Street believed in a transparent meritocracy free of artificial preferences giving unearned advantages to some while disadvantaging others. Nobody on Wall Street back then wanted to try to answer questions of why, for how long, to what degree, and for what groups in what proportions. No logical arguments worked.</p>

<p>Wall Street employees at all levels were well compensated, but so were the hardware, software, application, data, and services vendors. They created, developed, sold, and delivered capital markets innovation that made lucrative Wall Street profits possible. My first system venture moved market data and applications from stand-alone terminals into integrated “video switching” systems. Those were then made obsolete when we introduced digital trading systems with real-time datafeeds and applications, and sophisticated trading algorithms over high-speed networks. Digital disruption was worldwide, changing the capital markets industry landscape and resetting the definition of global winners and losers.</p>

<p>As a young trader I held 2 different telephone handsets while “squawk boxes” streamed live trade talk from market makers while I obsessed over stacks of computer screens. The cacophony of noise on a big trading floor with thousands of traders was overwhelming to outsiders. Special acoustic treatments made sure shouting on the trading floor could be heard by traders across the room, specialized lighting minimized screen glare, and customized HVAC systems dissipated heat from thousands of traders and computer screens.</p>
